===== Sims 1994a, https://www.karlsims.com/papers/siggraph94.pdf (fetched 2026-09-27)

[Any bugs that allow energy leaks] ... ing and paddling dynamics. It is important that the physical simulation be reasonably accurate when optimizing for creatures that can move within it. Any bugs that allow energy leaks from non-conservation, or even round-off errors, will inevitably be discovered and exploited by the evolving creatures. Although this can be a lazy and often amusing approach for debugging a physical modeling system, it is not necessarily the most practical. 5 Behavior Selection In this work, virtual creatures are evolved by optimizing for a speci ...

[Each effector controls a degree of freedom] ...  types of effectors, such as sound or scent emitters, might also be interesting, but only effectors that exert simulated muscle forces are used here. Each effector controls a degree of freedom of a joint. The effectors for a given joint connecting two parts, are contained in the part further out in the hierarchy, so that each non-root part operates only a single joint connecting it to its parent. The angle sensors for that joint are also contained in this part. Each effector is given a maximum-strength proportional to the maximum cross  ...

[maximum-strength proportional] ...  operates only a single joint connecting it to its parent. The angle sensors for that joint are also contained in this part. Each effector is given a maximum-strength proportional to the maximum cross sectional area of the two parts it joins. Effector forces are scaled by these strengths and not permitted to exceed them. Since strength scales with area, but mass scales with volume, as in nature, behavior does not always scale uniformly. 3.4 Combining Morphology and Control The genotype descriptions of virtual brains and the ...

[generating high velocities by simply falling over] ... ed as the selection criteria, but the vertical component of velocity is ignored. For land environments, it can be necessary to prevent creatures from generating high velocities by simply falling over. This is accomplished by ﬁrst running the simulation with no friction and no effector forces until the height of the center of mass reaches a stable minimum. 5.3 Jumping Jumping behavior can be selected for by measuring the maximum height above the ground of the lowest part of the creature. An alternative method is to use the average height of the ...

[previous time-step is reduced] ... world-space bounding boxes intersect are tested for penetrations, and collisions with a ground plane are also tested if one exists. If necessary, the previous time-step is reduced to keep any new penetrations below a certain tolerance. Connected parts are permitted to interpenetrate but not rotate completely through each other. This is achieved by using adjusted shapes when testing for collisions between connected parts. The shape of the smaller part is clipped halfway back from its point of attachment so it can swing freel ...

[persistent interpenetrations] ... initially interpenetrate. A short simulation with collision detection and response attempts to repel any intersecting parts, but those creatures with persistent interpenetrations are also discarded. Computation can be conserved for most ﬁtness methods by discontinuing the simulations of individuals that are predicted to be unlikely to survive the next generation. The ﬁtness is periodically estimated for each simulation as it proceeds. Those are stopped that are either not moving at all or are doing somewhat worse than the  ...

[Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg] ... al forces of each hierarchy of connected rigid parts [3]. Integration determines the resulting motions from these accelerations and is performed by a Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method which is a fourth order Runge-Kutta with an additional evaluation to estimate the error and adapt the step size. Typically between 1 and 5 integration time steps are performed for each frame of 1/30 second. The shapes of parts are represented here by simple rectangular solids. Bounding box hierarchies are used to reduce the number of collis ...

===== Bongard & Paul 2001, https://meclab.w3.uvm.edu/papers/2001_ECAL_Bongard.pdf (Type3 glyph names decoded; the letter c is lost in decoding)

[p opulation size of 300] ... parameters. All v alues in the genome range b et w een [A0] 1 : 00 and 1 : 00. Ea h ev olutionary run rep orted in this se tion is p erformed using a p opulation size of 300, and is run T able 1. The default size dimensions, masses and join t limits of the bip ed. All lengths and masses of the bip ed are relational: the unit length ( ul ), and the default mass ( um ), are set to the radii and masses of the knees and hip so k ets, resp e tiv ely . P arameters set in b oldfa e indi ate those parameters that are mo difie ...

[Run Morphology] ... phologi al parameter v alues an affe t only the mass distribution and the momen t of inertia, although more T able 2. Exp erimen tal regime summary . Run Morphology Blo ks T otal Genome Num b er of Set blo k mass length indep enden t runs 1 Fixed Absen t N/A 60 30 2 V ariable Absen t N/A 63 30 3 Fixed Presen t 0.512um 60 20 4 V ariable Presen t 0.512um 68 20 degrees of freedom of the rotational momen t of inertia are sub je ted to sele tion pressure in this ase. F or the v ariable morphology ev olutionary run ...

[Only t w o of the 20] ... red to agen t p opulations without mass blo ks, irresp e tiv e of whether or not the size and p osition of the blo ks is under ev olutionary on trol. Only t w o of the 20 p opulations a hiev e stable lo omotion in b oth ases; the remaining runs do not realize an y signifi an t fitness impro v emen ts o v er ev olutionary time. a) b) ) d) Fig. 2. Ev olutionary p erforman e of fixed and v ariable morphology agen t p opulations without mass blo ks. a) and b) rep ort the highest fitness v alues at- tained b y agen ts w ...

[tak en from 30] ... hology agen t p opulations with mass blo ks. a) and b) rep ort the highest fitness v alues attained b y agen ts with fixed and v ariable mass blo ks, tak en from 30 indep enden t ev olutionary runs. ) and d) rep ort the a v erage fitness v alues of these p opulations. 4 Dis ussion It is lear from Figs. 2 and 4 a that agen t p opulations with v arying leg widths tend to outp erform agen t p opulations with fixed leg widths. This stands in on- trast to the in tuitiv e notion that in the v ariable morphology ase ...

[In the 20 fixed morphology] ... presen t a m u h differen t pi ture. In these p opulations, the addition of eigh t morphologi al parameters do es not impro v e ev olutionary sear h. In the 20 fixed morphology p opulations and 20 v ariable morphology p opulations, only t w o instan es of stable lo omotion w ere dis o v ered in ea h. It is lear that bip edal lo omotion using agen ts with mass blo ks, using our exp erimen tal set-up, is a more diÆ ult task for the geneti algorithm, but the app earan e of stable w alking indi ates it is not imp ossible for ...

[tend to outp erform] ... hology agen t p opulations without mass blo ks. It is sho wn that, indep enden t of the initial random p opulation, v ariable morphology p opulations tend to outp erform fixed morphology p opulations. Fig. 4 b indi ates that for the ase of agen t p opulations with mass blo ks, on a v erage there is no impro v emen t in ev olutionary sear h in the v ariable morphology p opulations o v er the fixed morphology p opulations. In one ev olutionary run from exp erimen t set 2, the most fit agen t at genera- tion 170, wit ...

[do es not alw a ys yield] ...  the geneti algorithm. This suggests that for the artifi ial ev olution of adaptiv e b eha viour, the arbitrary in lusion of morphologi al parameters do es not alw a ys yield b etter results. In future studies w e plan to in v estigate in more detail ho w the in lusion of morphologi al parameters transforms the fitness lands ap e of the ev olving p op- ulations. Moreo v er, w e hop e to form ulate a systemati metho d for predi ting whi h morphologi al parameters of em b o died agen ts an augmen t the ev olution- ary di ...

===== Taylor & Massey 2001, https://www.tim-taylor.com/papers/taylor2001recent.pdf

[Despite various attempts] ...  after a small amount of experimentation with different values. A number of checks were also made to overcome limitations in the simulation software. Despite various attempts to limit the magnitude of the forces applied to joints, creatures would still sometimes evolve whose movements entailed forces and velocities that were too great for the physics engine to resolve at the given size of the integration step. In these cases, the physics engine tended to accumulate numerical errors to a point where the creature unrecov ...

[We kept a tally] ... for a given duration of simulated time. The MathEngine SDK does generate some runtime warnings that indicate that this kind of situation is imminent. We kept a tally of the number of such warnings that each creature generated, and aborted the simulation of any creature that had generated more than a certain threshold number of them. We also checked whether a creature had actually exploded throughout its evaluation (by checking for high velocities etc.), and immediately aborted any that had. Note that we were u ...

[New types of actuators] ... d two basic environments, sea and land. The sea environment included a simplistic model of fluid drag (a retarding force was applied to each sphyl, § New types of actuators are now available with the latest versions of the MathEngine and Havok dynamics toolkits, which give a much greater level of control and stability to the joint effectors. These are referred to as ‘force limited velocity constraints’ (FLVCs) in the MathEngine Dynamics Toolkit (version 2.0) 21 and ‘dashpots’ in Havok (version 1.3) 13. Dashpots are P ...

[we used orientation based] ... ented the effectors to control the relative motion of body parts. Sims’ effectors worked by applying forces directly between body parts. In contrast, we used orientation based proportional-derivative (PD) actuators28 acting on ball and socket joints. The input to these controllers was interpreted as a desired orientation for the joint, and the controller would exert a torque on the joined parts to move them towards this orientation. Early experiments indicated that the use of more sophisticated effectors such as these l ...

[generally in the range of 4 to 10] ...  runs proceeded in much the same way as described by Sims26. We placed upper limits on the number of body parts a creature could have (this limit was generally in the range of 4 to 10), and on the number of controller components within each body part (typically, 5 to 8). We also introduced bias terms (which were parameters of the system) that favored the selection of oscillator components (sine and saw wave generators) over other sorts of controller components when the initial randomly generated population of creatures was bein ...

[no matter which physics engine] ... ity of the MathEngine, Havok and Ipion engines in a variety of situations17,18. Although these products are improving, the current situation is that, no matter which physics engine is used, it is likely that a certain number of stability checks of the type just described will be required in any evolutionary system of this kind. A typical run (i.e. population size 300, 50-100 generations) would take between 4-8 hours on a single PC. A large proportion of the evolved swimmers were snake-like creatures of various sorts (example ...

===== Lehman et al. 2020, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.03453

[allocate time at the beginning] ... nd their horizontal velocity (Fig. 1). A video of this behavior can be seen here: https://goo.gl/pnYbVh. To prevent this exploit, it was necessary to allocate time at the beginning of each simulation to relax the potential energy inherent in the creature’s initial stancebefore motion was rewarded. Building on Sims’ work, but using a diﬀerent simulation platform, Krcah [69] bred creatures to jump as high above the ground as possible. In the ﬁrst set of experiments, each organism’s ﬁtness was calculated as PLOS 6/34 Figure 1.  ...

[ﬁrst used a simple Euler] ...  creatures experiments [38, 68], Karl Sims’ attempt to evolve swimming strategies resulted in new ways for evolution to cheat. The physics simulator ﬁrst used a simple Euler method for numerical integration, which worked well for typical motion. However, with faster motion integration errors couldaccumulate, and some creatures learned to exploit that bug by quickly twitching small body parts. In eﬀect, they could obtain “free energy,” to propel them at unrealistic speeds through the water. Similarly, when evolving jum ...

[Damping was increased] ... and swiftly drift across the ground, producing a surprisingly eﬀective form of locomotion. To achieve more realistic results, the system was patched. Damping was increased when contacting the ground, the minimum creature size was raised, and the time delta calculation was adjusted to reduce ground penetration. Evolution thus helped to surface unanticipated edge cases that were poorly handled by the physics simulator and experimental design. Figure 3. Vibrating robots.Evolved behavior is shown in frames, where time i ...

[few tenths of a second] ...  ﬂips over and walks on its elbows. The red line shows the center of mass of the robot over time. Note that the robot fulﬁlls the task since the ﬁrst few tenths of a second of the simulation are ignored, to focus on the gait in its limit cycle, and not the robot’s initial position. Elbow Walking Cully et al. (2015) [52] presented an algorithm that enables damaged robots to successfully adapt to damage in under two minutes. The chosen robot had six-legs, and evolution’s task was to discover how to walk with broken leg ...

[observing the creatures] ... ment, to the scientist’s surprise, some evolved individuals were extremely tall and also scored a nearly tenfold-improvement on their jumps! However, observing the creatures’ behaviors directly revealed that evolution had discovered another cheat: somersaulting without jumping at all. The evolved body consisted of a few large blocks reminiscent of a “head” supported by a long thin vertical pole (see Fig. 2). At the start of the simulation, the individual “kicks” the foot of its pole oﬀ the ground, and begins falling h ...

[adopt an adversarial mindset] ...  [138]. Undesirable outcomes can result from subtle interactions between ﬁtness functions and experimental setups, suggesting that practioners should adopt an adversarial mindset, looking for ways in which an agent could exploit seemingly innocuous design descisions. Another lesson relates to training in simulation, where evolution often exploits bugs to achieve high ﬁtness: Practioners should regularly visualize their simulated solutions to test whether the proposed solutions are valid and reasonable. A ﬁnal lesson for pr ...

===== Cheney et al. 2016 (ALIFE 2016), https://meclab.w3.uvm.edu/papers/2016_ALife_Cheney.pdf

[note that early] ... problem. We hope that this improved understanding of the fundamental problem domain will open the door for further scalability of evolved agents, and note that early ﬁndings from our future work point in that direction. Introduction In 1994, Karl Sims’ seminal work on “Evolving Virtual Creatures” (Sims, 1994b) created a ﬁeld of study by that name. This work featured simulated creatures that were able to optimize both their physical layout and their behavioral control strategies for such tasks as terrestrial lo ...

[focus on protection of diversity within morphologies] ... notice that since hills and valleys of this landscape may be caused by the morphology and onto the controller, diversity maintenance would do best to focus on protection of diversity within morphologies if it were to encourage the morphological variations (despite their adverse effects on control). The most important future work would involve potential solutions to this problem. Initial results regarding future work already suggest that our understanding of embodied cognition, and the ﬁnding of especially poor mutation success for morphological v ...

[multi-timescale model] ... and the ﬁnding of especially poor mutation success for morphological variations, can inform improved search methods. Speciﬁcally, results employing a multi-timescale model, in which morphological mutations are given time to re-adapt their controllers to their new situated forms (and thus conform themselves to their new morphological “communication channels”, thereby “unscrambling” the detrimental effects of the morphological mutation) before the value of these morphological variations are evaluated, shows an improve ...

[protecting innovations to the morphology] ... oved ability for optimization of virtual creatures compared to traditional methods. This is exactly the type of diversity maintenance that focuses on protecting innovations to the morphology speciﬁcally. Ideally, further algorithmic improvements will occur from embracing the fundamental theory of embodied cognition, but the positive initial results noted here provide conformation that it’s possible and that the understanding gained from this current work may contribute to future improvements. Conclusion We have examined a speciﬁc exam ...

===== Cheney et al. 2013 (GECCO), http://jeffclune.com/publications/2013_Softbots_GECCO.pdf

[analogous to the cost of expending energy] ... , similar to an animal having to work harder to carry more weight. In another, the soft robots are penalized for their amount of actuatable material, analogous to the cost of expending energy to contract muscles. In a third treatment, a penalty is assessed for the number of connections (adjoining faces between voxels), akin to animals that live in warm environments and overheat if their surface area is small in comparison to their volume. Finally, there is also the baseline treatment in which no penalties are assessed. While a cost for ...

===== Auerbach & Bongard 2014, PLOS printable PDF

[do not reflect a consistent relationship] ... volved in each of the 49 icy environments are compared with independent sets of trials conducted in the control environment (see Figs. 4 and S1) they do not reflect a consistent relationship between environment and evolved morphological complexity. It is hypothesized that without a cost to becoming more complex the driven trend towards increased morphological complexity will dominate in all of the investigated environments. On the other hand, it is hypothesized that when complexity does come at a cost–as is thought to occur in biologi ...

[when a cost is imposed on morphological complexity] ... ected in the absence of selection, but that more complex environments in fact induce selection for more complex morphologies then simple environments when a cost is imposed on morphological complexity. Since it is often thought that complexity does incur a cost in biological organisms [35,36], the differences observed between environments in this regime may be more representative of the selection pressures present in biological systems. These results have illustrated how the environment may influence the complexity of evolving morphologies. Bas ...

